OME-TIFF file structure
=======================

The following section discusses various considerations when designing
OME-TIFF filesets distributed over multiple files.

Single versus multiple files
----------------------------

Splitting a fileset across multiple files can have advantages in terms of
acquisition but also processing purposes. The OME-TIFF file format can support
any image organization. However, using one TIFF file per timepoint per channel with the focal planes for that timepoint and channel stored sequentially within the TIFF makes for very easy :ref:`TiffData` elements.

One of main downside of splitting OME-TIFF over multiple files is their
inherent fragility to common file-system operations such as file renaming or
file copying which have the potential to "break" the fileset.

File size
---------

The TIFF file format internally uses 32-bit byte offsets. The largest offset
which can be represented is 4GB, making this value the upper limit of the file
size supported by the design.

The OME-TIFF file format supports the BigTIFF file extensions allowing to
use 64-bit byte offsets to overcome this size limit.

The main limitation of the BigTIFF file extension is the degree of its
adoption in the community. Although OME Bio-Formats and OMERO will handle
OME-TIFF using the BigTIFF file extension, other tools might not be able to
open it.

Metadata redundancy
-------------------

Storing multiple planes per OME-TIFF file and keeping the OME-XML metadata
embedded in every file header is recommended but it is not always practical.
Normally, the OME-XML metadata block is small in comparison with the binary
pixel data in the file, but in some cases, it may be proportionately larger.

Common reasons for this situation include:

- storing each image plane in its own TIFF file
- having a large amount of metadata such as plane-specific timestamps
- having many structured annotations in the OME-XML.

For example, if you have a dataset with 1,000 time points, with each
plane recorded at 512x512 as uint8 pixel type, storing each plane in its
own file uncompressed requires ~256KB of disk per file, and ~256MB
total. But if you have 5MB of corresponding OME-XML metadata, embedding
a copy of that metadata in every file would result in a dataset nearly
20 times larger than before, requiring ~5.5MB of disk per file, and more
than 5GB total.

One of the advantages of reproducing the OME-XML metadata across file is
redundancy. If even one of the constituent files survives a data crash, the
metadata survives. The space tradeoff of this duplication is acceptable when
compared to the bulk of the pixel data in most cases, provided a suitable
number of planes are stored in each TIFF.

Companion file vs master OME-TIFF file
--------------------------------------

When storing partial OME-XML metadata blocks in some or all of the OME-TIFF
files and use a master file containing the full OME-XML metadata, the latter
The master file can either be another OME-TIFF from the fileset or a
standalone companion OME-XML file.

Using a companion OME-XML file allows to easily append information that can
only be generated at the end of the acquisition without the need to
manipulate existing TIFF IFDs. It has the same drawbacks as the ones
highlighted above in the sense that this companion file needs to be
preserved as part of the fileset to prevent metadata loss.

.. seealso::

   :ref:`binary_only`
      Technical specification about partial OME-XML metadata

    :ome-devel:`Proposed tweak to µManager data files in 2.0 <2016-April/003618.html>`
        Community discussion about usage of companion file in OME-TIFF filesets
